.\"/*
.\" * All rights reserved
.\" * Copyright (c) 2017-2019 SUSE LINUX GmbH, Nuernberg, Germany.
.\" * Authors: Howard Guo
.\" *
.\" * This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" * modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
.\" * as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
.\" * of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" *
.\" * This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" * but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" * MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" * GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" */
.\"
.TH saptune_v1 "8" "March 2019" "" "System Optimisation For SAP"
.SH NAME
saptune \- Comprehensive system optimisation management for SAP solutions (Version 1)

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsaptune daemon\fP
[ start | status | stop ]

\fBsaptune note\fP
[ list | verify ]

\fBsaptune note\fP
[ apply | simulate | verify | customise | revert ]  NoteID

\fBsaptune solution\fP
[ list | verify ]

\fBsaptune solution\fP
[ apply | simulate | verify | revert ] SolutionName

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBThis is verson 1 of saptune which is deprecated. Please migrate to saptune version 2. Refere to saptune-migrate(7) for more information\fR

saptune is a utility program that optimises your system according to recommendations/best practice guides written by SAP and SUSE.

saptune fully integrates with tuned(8), the tuned-profile name associated with this utility is "saptune".

To support vendor or customer specific tuning values, saptune supports 'drop-in' files residing in /etc/saptune/extra. All files found in /etc/saptune/extra are listed when running '\fBsaptune note list\fR'. All \fBnote options\fR are available for these files except 'saptune note customise'.
.SS
.RS 0
Syntax of the file names:
<key>-<description>
.br
e.g. Vendor-Recommended_OS_Settings
.br
or   SAP4711-very_aromatic_tunings
.RE
.SS
.RS 0
Syntax of the file:
The content of the 'drop-in' file should be written in a INI file style with sections headed by '[section_name]' keywords. At the moment only the section keyword '[sysctl]' is supported. A comment line starts with #.
.br
Please write the section keyword '[sysctl]' in the first line and add the desired tunables in 'sysctl.conf' syntax.


.SH DAEMON ACTIONS
.SS
.TP
.B start
Start tuned(8) daemon, set tuning profile to "saptune", and apply a minimal set of universal optimisations to the system. The daemon will be automatically activated upon system boot.
.TP
.B status
Report the status of tuned(8) daemon and whether it is using the correct profile.
.TP
.B stop
Stop tuned(8) daemon, and revert all optimisations that were previously applied by saptune. The daemon will no longer automatically activate upon boot.

.SH NOTE ACTIONS
Note denotes either an SAP note, or SUSE recommendation article.
.SS
.TP
.B apply
Apply optimisation settings specified in the Note. The Note will be automatically activated upon system boot if the daemon is enabled.
.TP
.B list
List all SAP notes and SUSE recommendation articles that saptune is capable of implementing. The marked ones are currently implemented.
.TP
.B verify
If a Note ID is specified, saptune verifies the current running system against the recommendations specified in the Note. If Note ID is not specified, saptune verifies all system parameters against all implemented Notes.
.TP
.B simulate
Show all changes that will be applied to the system if the specified Note is applied.
.TP
.B customise
If the Note uses manual input to calculation optimised parameters, an editor will be launched to allow changing the input.
.TP
.B revert
Revert optimisation settings carried out by the Note, and the Note will no longer be activated automatically upon system boot.

.SH SOLUTION ACTIONS
A solution is associated with one or more Notes. Activation of a solution will activate all associated Notes.
.SS
.TP
.B apply
Apply optimisation settings recommended by the SAP solution. These settings will be automatically activated upon system boot if the daemon is enabled.
.TP
.B list
List all SAP solution names that saptune is capable of implementing. The marked ones are currently implemented.
.TP
.B simulate
Show all notes that are associated with the specified SAP solution, and all changes that will be applied once the solution is activiated.
.TP
.B verify
If a solution name is specified, saptune verifies the current running system against the recommended settings of the SAP solution. If solution name is not specified, saptune verifies all system parameters against all implemented solutions.
.TP
.B revert
Revert optimisation settings recommended by the SAP solution, and these settings will no longer be activated automatically upon system boot.

.SH FILES
.NF
/etc/sysconfig/saptune
.br
/etc/saptune/extra/

.SH SEE ALSO
.NF
saptune-note(5) saptune-migrate(7) saptune(8) saptune_v2(8) tuned(8) tuned-adm(8)

.SH AUTHOR
.NF
Howard Guo <hguo@suse.com>
