
.TH sapconf2saptune 1 "March 2019" "1.0" "sapconf configuration conversion"

.SH NAME
sapconf2saptune \- converts a sapconf configuration into a saptune v2 configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sapconf2saptune \fB 
[ 
.IR PROFILE
]

.B sapconf2saptune \fB 
.IR SAPCONF_SYCONFIG
.IR TUNED_CONFIG

.B sapconf2saptune\fB 
-h|--help
.SH DESCRIPTION
The tool sapconf2saptune converts a sapconf configuration into a drop-in file for saptune v2 to aid a move from sapconf to saptune.

The tool expects either the sapconf sysconfig file as first and the sapconf tuned.conf as second parameter or the sapconf profile.
Without any parameters sapconf2saptune tries to determine the sapoconf profile by reading '/etc/tuned/active_profile'.

The generated saptune configuration is printed on stdout. 
To use it, redirect the output to a file which has to be placed into '/etc/saptune/extra/' (See EXAMPLES below).
The new configuration should be visible by 'saptune note list' and is ready to use. 

During conversion the tool is writing information, warning and error messages to stderr. This is the case for:

    \(bu Problems reading the configuration files.
    \(bu Possible wrong configuration files.
    \(bu Unknown variables or options. This indicates manual added configurations typically.
    \(bu Data type conversion issues. This would indicate a broken sapconf/tuned configuration.
    \(bu Parameters not supported by saptune. This is the case for min_perf_pct.  

.TP 
.B PROFILE \fB               
The saponf profile to convert. 
.TP
.B SAPCONF_SYCONFIG \fB  
Path to the sapconf sysconfig file, usually /etc/sysconfig/sapconf.
.TP
.B TUNED_CONFIG \fB
Path to the tuned.conf file of a sapconf proifle. Usually this is /usr/lib/tuned/<profile>/tuned.conf or /etc/tuned/<profile>/tuned.conf.
.TP
.B -h|--help \fB
Displays some help information.

.SH IMPORTANT
Please notice:
.IP \[bu] 2
A current sapconf has to be used!  If this is not the case, update first!
.IP \[bu]
The sapconf configuration has to be correct! Please verify /etc/sysconfig/sapconf and the used tuned.conf. Also check the logs of sapconf (/var/log/sapconf.log) and tuned (/var/log/tuned/). Keep in mind that there can be an override file '/etc/tuned/<profile>/tuned.conf!
.IP \[bu]
Double-check your sapconf configuration and the converted result. sapconf2saptune is a simple conversion tool and does
    \(bu no checks for multiple parameters,
    \(bu no checks for the sanity of values,
    \(bu no checks to detect any misconfguration,
    \(bu not convert manual added parameters.
.IP \[bu]
Read the info, warn and error messages printed on stderr during conversion.
.IP \[bu]
min_perf_pct is not supported by saptune and is not moved.  
.IP \[bu]
Use the generated configuration as the only note for saptune! Combine them with others 
.B *ONLY IF YOU KNOW WHAT YOU ARE DOING*\fB
!
.SH EXIT STATUS
On success, 0 is returned, 1 otherwise. The error messages on stderr should tell the cause.
.SH EXAMPLE
To convert a configuration on SLES 15 (no tuned overwrite configuration):

.RS 
.B sapconf2saptune /etc/sysconfig/sapconf /usr/lib/tuned/sapconf/tuned.conf
.RE

To convert a configuration (sap-hana profile) on SLES 12 (no tuned overwrite configuration):

.RS 
.B sapconf2saptune /etc/sysconfig/sapconf /usr/lib/tuned/sap-hana/tuned.conf
.RE

Convert and write the configuration to an extra file for saptune.

.RS 
.B sapconf2saptune /etc/sysconfig/sapconf /usr/lib/tuned/sap-hana/tuned.conf > /etc/saptune/extra/sapconf.conf
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/sysconfig/sapconf \fB
Main configuration file for sapconf.
.TP
.B /usr/lib/tuned/<profile>/tuned.conf, /etc/tuned/<profile>/tuned.conf \fB
The tuned configuration. Either the default configuration ('/usr/lib/tuned') or the overwrite file ('/etc/tuned/') is used!
.TP
.B /etc/tuned/active_profile \fB
Current tuned profile. Used by sapconf2saptune to determine the used sapconf profile.
.SH SEE ALSO
sapconf(8), sapconf(5), sapconf(7), saptune(8)
.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
.SH AUTHOR
Sören Schmidt <soeren.schmidt@suse.com>
